>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, AUGUST 30: A
PROMISING NEW TREATMENT FOR
HEART FAILURE.
THE E.U. WEIGHS ADDITIONAL
SANCTIONS AGAINST RUSSIA FOR
ITS ACTIONS IN UKRAINE.
WE’LL HAVE A REPORT FROM KIEV.
AND THE ISLAMIC STATE, USING
SOCIAL MEDIA TO WIN RECRUITS BY
PROMOTING ITS SAVAGERY.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
WITH THOUSANDS OF RUSSIAN TROOPS
NOW REPORTEDLY FIGHTING
UKRAINIAN GOVERNMENT FORCES IN
EASTERN UKRAINE, UKRAINIAN
PRESIDENT PETRO POROSHENKO
APPEALED TODAY FOR HELP FROM THE
WEST.
AND DURING A MEETING WITH
EUROPEAN UNION LEADERS IN
BRUSSELS, HE WARNED THAT THE
CRISIS PUTS AT "HIGH RISK" NOT
ONLY PEACE AND STABILITY IN
UKRAINE BUT THROUGHOUT EUROPE.
>> I THINK THAT WE ARE VERY
CLOSE TO THE POINT OF NO RETURN.
POINT OF NO RETURN IS FULL-SCALE
WAR, WHICH ALREADY HAPPENED IN
THE TERRITORY CONTROLLED BY
SEPARATISTS.
>> Sreenivasan: THE WESTERN
LEADERS ARE DEBATING WHETHER TO
IMPOSE A THIRD ROUND OF MORE
STRINGENT SANCTIONS AGAINST
RUSSIA FOLLOWING ITS TAKEOVER OF
CRIMEA AND ITS MORE RECENT
INTERVENTION.
FOR MORE ABOUT THE FIGHTING IN
UKRAINE, WE ARE JOINED NOW BY
ALAN CULLISON OF THE "WALL
STREET JOURNAL."
HE JOINS ME VIA SKYPE FROM KIEV.
ALAN, WHAT CAN YOU TELL US?
WHAT’S THE LATEST THERE THIS
MORNING?
THE WHOLE WEEK WE’VE BEEN
REPORTING ON NEW INCURSIONS OR
INVASIONS-- HOWEVER YOU WANT TO
CALL THEM-- BY RUSSIAN TROOPS
INTO DIFFERENT PART OF UKRAINE.
>> THERE ARE MORE DETAILS OF
MORE ARMOR BEING POURED IN.
THE LATEST ALLEGATION IS THAT AN
ARMORED COLUMN THAT CAME IN FROM
RUSSIA FLATTENED A TOWN NEAR
THE BORDER, A UKRAINIAN TOWN.
IT’S NOTHING THAT ANY OF US CAN
CONFIRM SINCE GETTING INTO THAT
PART OF THE BATTLE ZONE IS
EXTREMELY DANGEROUS.
BUT BASICALLY, IT’S JUST A
GRADUAL ESCALATION AND
OVERWHELMING... THEY SAY THAT
THE UKRAINIAN TROOPS ARE JUST
FACING OVERWHELMING ODDS AND SO
ARE BEING ENCIRCLED OR PUSHED
BACK.
>> Sreenivasan: ARE THERE
SPECIFIC VILLAGES?
ARE THERE SPECIFIC AREAS RIGHT
ALONG THE BORDER WHO ARE FEELING
IT MORE, WHO BASICALLY HAVE NO
CHOICE NOW?
>> WELL, THERE WERE... YES,
THERE WERE TWO... BASICALLY,
THERE ARE TWO BATTLE FRONTS NEAR
THE UKRAINIAN BORDER.
ONE WAS... ONE WAS NEAR THE
UKRAINIAN CITY OF LUHANSK.
THE OTHER WAS ONE NEAR DONETSK.
WHAT HAPPENED THIS WEEK WAS
THAT AN ARMORED COLUMN BROKE
INTO UKRAINE IN AN AREA WHERE
THERE WASN’T ANY REBEL ACTIVITY
BEFORE, WHICH WAS CLEARLY
EVIDENCE THAT THERE WERE
RUSSIAN FORCES DOING THIS.
THAT’S THE... THAT’S BEEN THE
MOST CATASTROPHIC PART OF THE
WEEK FOR THE UKRAINIANS.
THIS NEW FRONT THAT OPENED UP IN
THE SOUTH ALONG THE SEA OF AZOV,
BECAUSE THE RUSSIAN FORCES ARE
MOVING ALONG THE COAST AND MAY
BE TAKING THE TOWN OF... THE
PORT CITY OF MARIUPOL.
>> Sreenivasan: ARE THERE CASES
WHERE THE UKRAINIANS ARE
RETREATING, EITHER TACTICALLY OR
OTHERWISE?
>> YEAH, THEY’VE BEEN IN RETREAT
FOR ABOUT A WEEK NOW.
BUT MORE PROBLEMATIC FOR THE
UKRAINIANS IS THAT SEVERAL OF
THEIR GROUPS HAVE BEEN
SURROUNDED AND, OF COURSE,
GETTING OUT ALIVE, THAT IS A
CONSIDERATION.
THERE HAVE BEEN EFFORTS TO
NEGOTIATE A DEAL, I BELIEVE, A
TRADE FOR PRISONERS, AND IF THE
UKRAINIANS WOULD GIVE UP SOME
PRISONERS, THEN THE RUSSIANS
MIGHT LET THEM OUT OF
ENCIRCLEMENT AND BACK INTO
THEIR OWN TERRITORY.
BUT, YEAH, THE UKRAINIANS ARE
TAKING A BEATING AT THIS POINT.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW EFFECTIVE
ARE... SOME OF THE VIDEOS THAT
WE’VE SEEN OUT OF THERE OF...
ESPECIALLY ON SORT OF UKRAINIAN
INDEPENDENCE DAY IN THE LAST
WEEK AND A HALF OR SO, WE SAW
THAT THERE WERE ACTUALLY THE
SEPARATIST FORCES WERE PARADING
UKRAINIAN SOLDIERS THROUGH THE
STREETS.
IS THAT KIND OF A MESSAGE
GETTING OUT TO THE WIDER
UKRAINE, THAT THIS IS AN ACTIVE
WAR, THAT THERE ARE PRISONERS OF
WAR?
>> WELL, I THINK, AT LEAST IN
UKRAINE, IT’S BEEN CLEAR THAT
THEY’VE BEEN AT WAR FOR QUITE A
WHILE.
THEY’VE BEEN TRYING TO SEND THAT
MESSAGE TO PEOPLE.
I THINK THAT THE EFFECT OF THE
PRISONER PARADE ON UKRAINE WAS
THAT IT POLARIZED PEOPLE EVEN
MORE.
I MEAN, SOME WANT TO FIGHT
HARDER.
OTHERS ARE ALSO... IT’S JUST
AROUSING ENORMOUS ANIMOSITY
TOWARDS THOSE IN THE EAST WHO
ARE FIGHTING AGAINST THEM, AND
IT’S GOING TO MAKE PEACEMAKING A
LOT MORE DIFFICULT.
ALTHOUGH, THERE ARE THOSE
UKRAINIANS WHO, IF THE FATIGUE
SETS IN, AND IF THEY ARE... IF
THIS WAR CONTINUES FOR A LONG
TIME, THEY MIGHT DEVELOP A
ATTITUDE THAT THEY’RE JUST A
DIFFERENT PEOPLE OVER THERE WHO
ARE SO HOSTILE, THAT THEY JUST
DON’T WANT THEM TO BE PART OF
UKRAINE.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT THE
IDEA THAT UKRAINE IS ESSENTIALLY
CALLED OUT A DRAFT AND WANTS MEN
TO ENTER INTO MILITARY SERVICE?
>> WELL, I THINK MOBILIZATION IS
WHAT MOST PEOPLE EXPECT.
THEY’VE ACTUALLY... QUITE A FEW
PEOPLE HAVE BEEN ASKING WHY IT
HASN’T HAPPENED YET.
IT’S SOMETHING THAT THE
LEADERSHIP HAS BEEN... I DON’T
KNOW EXACTLY.
IT’S HARD TO SAY WHY THEY’VE
HELD OFF ON IT.
I THINK THAT THEY WERE HOPING
THAT THERE WOULD BE A
NEGOTIATED SOLUTION, AND THEY
WERE ACTUALLY QUITE OPTIMISTIC
ABOUT DEFEATING THE REBELS UP
UNTIL ABOUT A WEEK, WEEK AND A
HALF AGO, WHEN THEY SAID THAT
JUST A LOT OF TROOPS AND ARMOR
JUST STARTED MOVING IN-COUNTRY.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, ALAN
CULLISON OF THE "WALL STREET
JOURNAL," THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: FORMER
UNDERSECRETARY OF STATE NICHOLAS
BURNS WILL JOIN US TO DISCUSS
AMERICAN OPTIONS IN UKRAINE
IN A MOMENT.
NEAR THE GOLAN HEIGHTS, ALONG
THE BORDER BETWEEN ISRAEL AND
SYRIA, 32 UNITED NATIONS
PEACEKEEPERS FROM THE
PHILIPPINES CAME UNDER FIRE FROM
ISLAMIC MILITANTS BEFORE BEING
BROUGHT TO SAFETY.
LATER IN THE DAY, U.N. ARMORED
VEHICLES WERE OBSERVED RETURNING
TO THEIR BASE IN ISRAELI-
CONTROLLED TERRITORY.
MORE THAN 40 OTHER PEACEKEEPERS
FROM FIJI ARE STILL SURROUNDED
BY ISLAMISTS IN SYRIA AND ARE
REPORTED TO BE UNDER MORTAR AND
HEAVY MACHINE GUNFIRE.
THE KING OF SAUDI ARABIA IS
WARNING OF TERROR ATTACKS IN
EUROPE AND THE UNITED STATES
BEFORE THE END OF THE YEAR
UNLESS THE INTERNATIONAL
COMMUNITY MOVES SWIFTLY TO
CONFRONT THE ISLAMIC STATE.
IN COMMENTS TO FOREIGN
AMBASSADORS YESTERDAY, KING
ABDULLAH SAID, QUOTING NOW, "I
AM CERTAIN THAT AFTER A MONTH
THEY WILL REACH EUROPE, AND,
AFTER ANOTHER MONTH, AMERICA."
YESTERDAY, BRITAIN RAISED ITS
TERROR THREAT LEVEL TO SEVERE,
MEANING IT CONSIDERS AN ATTACK
HIGHLY LIKELY BUT NOT IMMINENT.
FROM MONROVIA, THE CAPITAL OF
THE WEST AFRICAN COUNTRY OF
LIBERIA, WORD THAT A QUARANTINE
PUT INTO PLACE 11 DAYS AGO TO
TRY TO CONTAIN THE OUTBREAK OF
EBOLA HAS BEEN LIFTED.
RESIDENTS LIVING IN THE AFFECTED
AREA HAD FEARED RUNNING OUT OF
FOOD AND WATER.
EBOLA HAS KILLED MORE THAN 1,500
PEOPLE SO FAR, AND, THE WORLD
HEALTH ORGANIZATION SAID THE
NUMBER OF CASES ROSE LAST WEEK
AT THE FASTEST PACE SINCE THE
OUTBREAK BEGAN FIVE MONTHS AGO.
PROMISING MEDICAL NEWS TONIGHT.
AN EXPERIMENTAL DRUG MADE BY
NOVARTIS LOWERS THE CHANCE OF
DEATH OR HOSPITALIZATION FROM
HEART FAILURE BY 20%.
THE DRUG WORKS IN PART BY
DILATING BLOOD VESSELS, ENABLING
THE HEART TO PUMP MORE
EFFECTIVELY.
THE COMPANY WILL SEEK APPROVAL
OF THE STILL UNNAMED DRUG BY THE
END OF THE YEAR IN THIS COUNTRY.
THE RESULTS, PUBLISHED TODAY IN
THE "NEW ENGLAND JOURNAL OF
MEDICINE," WERE OBTAINED DURING
A STUDY INVOLVING MORE THAN
8,500 PEOPLE IN 47 COUNTRIES.
THE STUDY WAS CUT SHORT BY
SEVERAL MONTHS BECAUSE THE
RESULTS WERE SO PROMISING.
CALIFORNIA LAWMAKERS HAVE PASSED
A BILL THAT WOULD MAKE THE STATE
THE FIRST IN THE NATION TO
PROHIBIT SUPERMARKETS, LIQUOR
STORES, PHARMACIES AND OTHER
BUSINESSES FROM USING PLASTIC
BAGS.
ENVIRONMENTALISTS SAY PLASTIC
BAGS ARE RARELY RECYCLED AND
OFTEN END UP IN THE OCEAN,
HARMING SEA LIFE.
GOVERNOR JERRY BROWN MUST STILL
SIGN THE BILL INTO LAW.
IN ANOTHER MATTER, BROWN’S
ADMINISTRATION IS APPEALING
JUNE’S COURT RULING WHICH
EFFECTIVELY BANNED TENURE FOR
TEACHERS IN THAT STATE.
THE COURT HAD RULED THAT THE
STATE’S TENURE SYSTEM VIOLATED
THE STATE’S CONSTITUTION BY
DENYING SOME OF CALIFORNIA’S SIX
MILLION STUDENTS A QUALITY
EDUCATION.
REPUBLICAN LEADERS CRITICIZED
THE BROWN ADMINISTRATION’S
DECISION TO APPEAL.
THE STATE SAYS THE JUDGE HAD
FAILED TO SPELL OUT ADEQUATE
LEGAL GROUNDS FOR HIS DECISION.
A FEDERAL COURT IN TEXAS HAS
STRUCK DOWN MAJOR PARTS OF A LAW
THAT WOULD HAVE RESTRICTED
ABORTIONS IN THAT STATE.
THE LAW, WHICH WAS TO HAVE GONE
INTO EFFECT MONDAY, WOULD HAVE
REQUIRED ABORTION CLINICS TO
MEET HOSPITAL BUILDING
STANDARDS, LIKE WIDENING
HALLWAYS, BEFORE CONDUCTING
ADDITIONAL PROCEDURES.
THE JUDGE SAID THE LAW WOULD
HAVE PLACED AN UNDUE BURDEN ON
WOMEN IN PART BECAUSE SOME WOMEN
WOULD HAVE HAD TO TRAVEL 500
MILES TO GET AN ABORTION.
AND THE RARE INTACT SKELETAL
REMAINS OF A MAN THOUGHT TO HAVE
LIVED MORE THAN 6,000 YEARS AGO
HAVE GONE ON DISPLAY AT THE PENN
MUSEUM IN PHILADELPHIA.
THE REMAINS WERE FIRST
DISCOVERED IN 1930 IN WHAT IS
NOW SOUTHERN IRAQ, BUT SAT IN
STORAGE IN THE MUSEUM’S BASEMENT
EVER SINCE.
THEY WERE FOUND IN AN UNMARKED
BOX ONLY AFTER THE MUSEUM
STARTED DIGITIZING ITS
COLLECTION AND COULDN’T ACCOUNT
FOR THE ITEM.
>> Sreenivasan: RETURNING NOW TO
THE CRISIS IN UKRAINE.
FOR MORE PERSPECTIVE ABOUT WHAT
OPTIONS THE UNITED STATES AND
ITS WESTERN ALLIES HAVE TO DEAL
WITH THE RUSSIAN MILITARY
INTERVENTION THERE, WE ARE
JOINED NOW VIA SKYPE FROM
WESTPORT, MASSACHUSETTS, BY
NICHOLAS BURNS.
HE IS A FORMER UNDERSECRETARY OF
STATE AND NOW A PROFESSOR AT THE
HARVARD KENNEDY SCHOOL OF
GOVERNMENT.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
SO WHAT SHOULD THE WEST’S ROLE
BE HERE?
WHAT’S THE APPROPRIATE BALANCE
BETWEEN DIPLOMACY AND MILITARY
ACTION?
>> WELL, HARI, THIS IS A MAJOR
TURNING POINT IN THE CRISIS
BECAUSE PRESIDENT PUTIN HAS NOW
PUT RUSSIAN SOLDIERS, RUSSIAN
MECHANIZED EQUIPMENT OVER THE
BORDER INTO UKRAINE.
THEY’VE ENCIRCLED THE UKRAINIAN
MILITARY, THEY’VE TURNED THE
TIDE OF THIS WAR.
IT’S AN OUTRIGHT VIOLATION OF
INTERNATIONAL LAW.
SO I THINK THAT THE WEST HAS
THREE OPTIONS AHEAD OF IT, AND
THERE WILL BE A VERY IMPORTANT
NATO SUMMIT MEETING NEXT WEEK IN
WALES TO CONSIDER THIS.
NUMBER ONE, STRONGER SANCTIONS
AGAINST THE RUSSIAN GOVERNMENT
AND THE RUSSIAN ECONOMY.
AND THIS WILL MEAN VERY SEVERE
FINANCIAL SANCTIONS, THE KIND OF
SANCTIONS THAT WILL REALLY DRIVE
UP THE COST TO PRESIDENT PUTIN
FOR WHAT HE HAS DONE.
SECOND, THE UKRAINIAN GOVERNMENT
IS ASKING FOR SOPHISTICATED ARMS
TRANSFERS FROM EUROPE AND THE
UNITED STATES, AND INTELLIGENCE
SUPPORT SO THEY CAN FIGHT BACK
AND CONTROL ITS OWN TERRITORY.
I THINK PRESIDENT OBAMA’S BEEN
VERY CLEAR, AND RIGHTLY SO, THE
UNITED STATES IS NOT GOING TO GO
TO WAR WITH RUSSIA OVER UKRAINE,
BUT CERTAINLY WE HAVE AN
INTEREST IN HELPING THE
UKRAINIANS TO DEFEND THEMSELVES
AND DEFEND THE TERRITORY.
AND THIRD, CONTINUED ECONOMIC
SUPPORT.
BUT HERE THE EUROPEANS SHOULD
TAKE THE LEAD, LED BY GERMANY,
BECAUSE THE UKRAINIAN ECONOMY,
AS YOU KNOW, IS FALTERING, AND
IT NEEDS A DRAMATIC INFUSION OF
WESTERN CAPITAL.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THERE ANY
REASON TO BELIEVE THAT THESE
SANCTIONS WILL WORK?
WE’VE IMPOSED SOME SANCTIONS ON
RUSSIA, AND SO HAVE THE
EUROPEANS.
IT JUST SEEMS THAT THEY’VE
ESCALATED NOW INTO A SANCTIONS
WAR.
>> IT’S REALLY THE ONLY PRESSURE
POINT THAT THE WEST HAS RIGHT
NOW BECAUSE, AGAIN, WE’VE
RIGHTLY GIVEN UP THE
ALTERNATIVE OF WAR.
IT DOESN’T MAKE SENSE LEGALLY OR
POLITICALLY FOR US TO TANGLE
WITH THE RUSSIAN GOVERNMENT.
WE’RE TWO NUCLEAR WEAPONS
COUNTRIES.
SO IT’S REALLY THE RUSSIAN
ECONOMY THAT’S VULNERABLE.
THE RUSSIAN ECONOMY IS VERY MUCH
INTEGRATED, PARTICULARLY WITH
THE EUROPEAN ECONOMY.
IT DEPENDS ON INFUSIONS OF
INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL.
IT DEPENDS ON MANUFACTURED
IMPORTS FROM EUROPE, ESPECIALLY.
AND IF THE EUROPEANS WILL AGREE
TO SUBSTANTIAL FINANCIAL
SANCTIONS, MUCH STRONGER THAN
THE FIRST TWO ROUNDS OF
SANCTIONS OVER THE LAST FIVE
MONTHS, THAT WILL BE THE BEST
WAY TO GET PUTIN’S ATTENTION AND
TO SHOW HIM, DEMONSTRATE TO HIM,
THAT THERE’S A REAL COST FOR
WHAT HE’S DONE IN VIOLATING
INTERNATIONAL LAW IN THE WAY
HE’S DONE SO.
>> Sreenivasan: IF WE BEGIN ARMS
TRANSFERS, ARE WE ESSENTIALLY
ENGAGING IN THE EQUIVALENT OF A
PROXY WAR AGAINST RUSSIA?
>> NO, WE’RE SIMPLY HELPING A
FRIENDLY COUNTRY.
AND UKRAINE, FOR THE LAST 15
YEARS, HAS BEEN A FRIENDLY
COUNTRY TO THE NATO ALLIES,
INCLUDING THE UNITED STATES.
WE’RE HELPING THAT COUNTRY
DEFEND ITSELF, PROTECT ITS
BORDERS, POLICE ITS STREETS,
TAKE BACK TWO BIG CITIES,
DONETSK AND LUHANSK, IN
THE EASTERN PART OF THE
COUNTRY THAT ARE CRITICAL FOR
THE SURVIVAL OF AN INTEGRATED
UKRAINE.
AND I THINK THE REASON TO DO SO,
HARI, IS THAT THE PRINCIPLE AT
STAKE HERE IS SO IMPORTANT.
AT THE END OF THE COLD WAR, WE
ACHIEVED A DEMOCRATIC PEACE IN
EUROPE, SOMETHING THAT EUROPE
HAD NOT BEEN FOR CENTURIES.
THAT’S NOW ALL AT RISK BECAUSE
PUTIN VERY CYNICALLY IS USING
FORCE TO DIVIDE COUNTRIES AND
DRAW NEW DIVIDING LINES IN
EUROPE.
SO IT’S THAT IMPORTANT THAT THE
UNITED STATES AND THE WEST
EUROPEANS GET ENGAGED HERE,
AND NEXT WEEK’S GOING TO BE AN
IMPORTANT WEEK.
WE’LL KNOW THE ANSWER.
>> Sreenivasan: SO HOW
CONSEQUENTIAL IS UKRAINE’S
ATTEMPT TO JOIN NATO, AND HOW
LONG WOULD THAT PROCESS TAKE?
>> YOU KNOW, UKRAINE HAS BEEN A
PARTNER OF NATO SINCE THE LATE
1990s.
IT’S NOT AT ALL REALISTIC THAT
UKRAINE WILL BECOME A MEMBER OF
NATO.
GIVEN THE FACT THAT UKRAINE IS
FRACTURED-- IT HAS THESE MASSIVE
TERRITORIAL DISPUTES WITH
RUSSIA-- UKRAINE CAN HOPE TO BE
A PARTNER... CONTINUE TO BE A
PARTNER OF NATO, TO WORK WITH
IT, BUT I THINK WHAT THE
UKRAINIANS NEED AND WANT MOST,
HARI, IS NOT NATO
MEMBERSHIP; THEY WANT TO TRADE
RELATIONSHIP WITH A EUROPEAN
UNION.
THEY WON’T BE A MEMBER OF THE
EUROPEAN UNION ANY TIME SOON, AS
WELL, BUT THEY NEED THE TRADE.
THEY NEED THE CAPITAL
INVESTMENT.
THEY NEED THE ECONOMIC
ASSISTANCE THAT SOME KIND OF
ASSOCIATION, A PARTNERSHIP
ASSOCIATION WITH THE EUROPEAN
UNION WOULD HAVE.
AND REMEMBER, PRESIDENT PUTIN’S
INVASION OF CRIMEA, AND
EVERYTHING HE’S DONE WAS
PRECIPITATED BY THE FACT THAT
THE UKRAINIANS WERE THREATENING
A TRADE AGREEMENT WITH THE
EUROPEAN UNION.
HE IS THAT PARANOID ABOUT STATES
ALONG HIS PERIPHERY LOOKING
WEST AS OPPOSED TO EAST.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT
THIS IDEA OF NOVO RUSSIA,
SOMETHING THAT THE RUSSIANS HAVE
SAID, "SURE, WE’LL STOP ALL OF
THIS IF WE CAN JUST GO AHEAD AND
ANNEX THIS PORTION OF UKRAINE
BACK."
IT SEEMS THAT WHETHER WE LIKE IT
OR NOT, THEY’VE ALREADY SENT THE
TROOPS IN AND ARE IN FACT TAKING
OVER THAT PART OF UKRAINE.
>> WELL, IT’S A VERY UNSETTLING
AND DESTABILIZING CONCEPT THAT
YOU’D SAY THAT WE HAVE A RIGHT
AS RUSSIANS TO UNITE ALL THE
RUSSIANS OUTSIDE THE BORDERS OF
RUSSIA.
THERE ARE SIGNIFICANT RUSSIAN
POPULATIONS, OF COURSE, IN
UKRAINE, BUT ALSO IN MOLDAVIA,
IN BELARUS, IN KAZAKHSTAN AND
UZBEKISTAN.
SHOULD WE SUPPORT THE RUSSIAN
GOVERNMENT’S RIGHT TO MARCH INTO
THOSE COUNTRIES, TAKE OVER
PORTIONS OF THOSE COUNTRIES
SIMPLY BECAUSE ETHNIC RUSSIANS
ARE LIVING THERE?
THIS IS AN INEXACT COMPARISON,
OF COURSE, BUT THAT WAS
ESSENTIALLY THE PHILOSOPHY OF
THE NAZI PARTY IN GERMANY IN THE
THE 1930S, THAT WE WOULD...
THEY WOULD UNITE THE GERMANS
LIVING OUTSIDE THE GERMAN REICH.
IT’S A VERY DANGEROUS,
DESTABILIZING CONCEPT.
WE VOWED AFTER THE SECOND WORLD
WAR WE WOULD NOT ALLOW THAT KIND
OF ACTION IN EUROPE, AND HERE IT
IS WITH PRESIDENT PUTIN WITH
HIS NOVO RUSSIA CONCEPT, WHICH
IS DANGEROUS, AND IT DESERVES...
IT NEEDS TO BE OPPOSED BY THE
UNITED STATES AND BY THE WEST
EUROPEANS.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
NICHOLAS BURNS, THANKS SO MUCH
FOR YOUR TIME.
>> THANK YOU.
>>KEEP UP WITH THE DAY’S NEWS
IN REAL TIME.
READ NEWSHOUR’S RUNDOWN BLOG AT
newshour.pbs.org.
>> Sreenivasan: THE ISLAMIC
STATE HAS ENTERED OUR
CONSCIOUSNESS FOR MULTIPLE
REASONS.
PARTLY FOR THE SAVAGERY THEY’RE
WILLING TO COMMIT, AND ALSO
BECAUSE OF THE SAVVY THEY
DISPLAY IN SPREADING THEIR
MESSAGE.
FOR SOME ANALYSIS, YESTERDAY I
SPOKE WITH SHADI HAMID OF THE
BROOKINGS INSTITUTION AND AUTHOR
OF "TEMPTATIONS OF POWER:
ISLAMISTS AND ILLIBERAL
DEMOCRACY IN A NEW MIDDLE EAST";
AND PHILIP SMYTHE A RESEARCHER
AT THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND
AND BLOGGER AT HIZBALLAH
CAVALCADE, WHO STUDIES ISLAMIC
EXTREMISM.
SHADI HAMID, COMPARE THESE GUYS
TO AL QAEDA.
IT SEEMS THAT WE WERE ALMOST
BETTER OFF GETTING THESE GRAINY
VIDEOTAPES FROM OSAMA BIN LADEN
OUT OF A CAVE, COMPARED TO WHAT
WE’RE SEEING TODAY.
>> SO, ISIS ARE QUITE ADVANCED
IN THEIR MARKETING AND MEDIA
STRATEGY.
THEY’VE BEEN VERY ACTIVE ON
TWITTER.
AND FOR THOSE OF US ON THE
OUTSIDE TRYING TO FOLLOW THEM,
YOU CAN ACTUALLY ENGAGE WITH
SOME OF THESE PEOPLE ON TWITTER
AND THEY’RE ACTIVELY TWEETING
ABOUT SOMEWHAT MUNDANE THINGS.
THERE WAS ACTUALLY A TWITTER
MEME WHERE ISIS FIGHTERS WERE
EATING UP JARS OF NUTELLA.
BUT ON THE OTHER HAND, YOU ALSO
SEE VERY SAVAGE THINGS LIKE
BEHEADINGS.
SO THERE IS A KIND OF STRANGE
DUALITY, A SCHIZOPHRENIA THAT
THEY’RE SHOWING THIS DARK,
BRUTAL SIDE, BUT THEY’RE ALSO
TRYING TO SHOW-- AT LEAST AS
THEY MIGHT SEE IT-- A MORE
HUMANE SIDE TO WESTERN
AUDIENCES.
AND THOSE... WE’RE NOT GOING TO
BUY THAT AS AMERICANS, BUT FOR
PEOPLE WHO ARE POTENTIALLY
SYMPATHETIC OR FENCE-SITTERS,
SEEING THOSE IMAGES CAN ACTUALLY
BE APPEALING.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, PHILIP
SMYTH, IT SEEMS IN THE PAST, IT
WAS GUYS HOLDING MACHINE GUNS IN
THE BACKDROP OF A VIDEO.
"THIS IS HOW TOUGH I AM."
IT SEEMS NOW THE BAR IS, I HAVE
TO BE HOLDING A HUMAN HEAD IN AN
INSTAGRAM.
>> WE’VE SEEN STUFF LIKE THIS
BEFORE.
IT’S NOT REALLY THAT NEW.
I MEAN, IT’S JUST THE PLATFORMS
THAT ARE BEING UTILIZED--
TWITTER, INSTAGRAM YOU
MENTIONED, FACEBOOK.
THERE IS NOW DIRECT OUTREACH
TO THE PEOPLE THEY WISH TO
RECRUIT AND THE PEOPLE THEY
WISH TO INFLUENCE.
>> Sreenivasan: WHY IS THIS
ESCALATION?
I MEAN, IS IT AN ESCALATION OF
THE SAVAGERY?
DO THESE GROUPS FEEL LIKE
THERE’S NO OTHER ALTERNATIVE?
WHY GO TO THESE EXTREMES NOW?
>> WELL, ONE THING THAT ISIS
WANTS TO DO IS INSTILL TERROR IN
THE HEARTS OF THEIR OPPONENTS.
SO, WHEN, SAY, THE IRAQI ARMY OR
THE SYRIAN ARMY SEE IMAGES OF
BEHEADING AND MASS EXECUTIONS,
THEY THINK TO THEMSELVES IF THEY
GET CAUGHT BY ISIS FIGHTERS,
THAT’S WHAT WILL HAPPEN TO THEM.
SO THAT REALLY HURTS THE MORALE
OF ANYONE WHO IS TRYING TO FIGHT
ISIS, AND WE SAW THAT IN A VERY
STRIKING FASHION WITH THE IRAQI
ARMY.
ISIS WAS GOING INTO MOSUL WITH A
MUCH SMALLER NUMBER OF FIGHTERS,
BUT THE IRAQI ARMY JUST
ESSENTIALLY DISSOLVED.
AND PART OF IT IS BECAUSE THEY
WERE HEARING ALL THESE STORIES
ABOUT THE MILITARY PROWESS AND
THE SAVAGERY OF THE ISIS
FIGHTERS.
SO IT DOES REALLY HAVE AN IMPACT
ON THE BATTLE FIELD.
>> Sreenivasan: PHILIP SMYTH,
HE MENTIONED EARLIER, KIND OF
ALMOST A HIJACKING OF
CONVERSATIONS.
THEY’RE NOT TRYING TO HIJACK
AIRCRAFT.
THEY’RE TRYING TO GET INTO THE
CONSCIOUSNESS OF PEOPLE
WHO ARE TALKING ABOUT ANYTHING
FROM NUTELLA TO THE ICE BUCKET
CHALLENGE.
>> CORRECT.
THEY WANT TO HAVE A FULL SWEEP.
IF YOU’RE TRYING TO CAST ANY
KIND OF A NARRATIVE, YOU WANT TO
LOOK AS... SOMETIMES AVERAGE AS
POSSIBLE.
IF SOMEBODY IS TRYING TO RECRUIT
ME, THEY’RE GOING TO WANT TO
INTERACT WITH ME LIKE THEY WERE
A FRIEND, LIKE... EVEN LIKE HOW
WE’RE TALKING NOW.
IT’S PROBABLY ONE OF THE BEST
WAYS TO GET IN AND INFLUENCE
SOMEBODY’S MIND.
>> Sreenivasan: SO SOME OF
THIS IS COMING INTO OR ACROSS
OUR RADARS BECAUSE THESE PEOPLE
UNDERSTAND ENGLISH.
WE’VE HAD THIS LARGER
CONVERSATION OF WESTERNERS
BECOMING RADICALIZED, BUT IT’S
ALSO BECAUSE THEY KNOW THE
DIFFERENCE OF WHAT THE WEST IS
TALKING ABOUT.
>> SO THERE’S AN IMPORTANT
DISTINCTION HERE.
THE HEAD OF THE ISLAMIC STATE,
BAGHDADI, IT’S NOT AS IF HE
HIMSELF IS TWEETING OR ANY OF
THE OTHER SENIOR FIGURES AROUND
HIM.
WE’RE TALKING ABOUT THE YOUNGER
FIGHTERS ON THE GROUND, MANY OF
WHOM ARE ENGLISH SPEAKING, AND
MANY OF WHOM ARE EUROPEAN, EVEN
A FEW THAT ARE AMERICAN.
SO FOR THEM, THEY GREW UP WITH
TWITTER, THEY GREW UP WITH
INSTAGRAM.
TWITTER IS ABOUT SOMETHING YOU
JUST DO... DO DURING THE DAY.
SO THEY GO ON THE BATTLE FIELD.
THERE’S BEEN A BIG FIGHT.
THEIR INSTINCT IS TO TWEET ABOUT
THAT.
>> Sreenivasan: THE INFLUENCE
OF KIND OF AMERICAN SPEAKERS--
OR I SHOULD SAY ENGLISH SPEAKERS
THROUGHOUT THE WESTERN WORLD
PARTICIPATING IN THIS
CONVERSATION, HOW IMPORTANT IS
THAT TO THE RECRUITMENT OF
OTHERS?
>> IT’S EXTREMELY IMPORTANT.
IF ONE OF YOUR TARGET
AUDIENCES, IF THEIR SOLE
LANGUAGE IS ENGLISH, THEN IT’S
NECESSARY TO BRING THEM IN AS
FOREIGN FIGHTERS.
BUT IT’S NOT SIMPLY THAT.
AS AN ANALYST, I ALSO HAVE
INTERACTED WITH ISIS SUPPORTERS,
AND THEY WILL TRY TO INFLUENCE
MATERIAL THAT COMES OUT OF
OTHER ANALYSTS.
SO THEY UNDERSTAND.
THIS IS KIND OF A FULL-SPECTRUM
APPROACH, IF YOU WILL, TO SPREAD
THEIR NARRATIVE OR TO INFLUENCE
OTHER PEOPLE THAT ARE ON THE
WEB.
>> Sreenivasan: SO ARE YOU
FINDING... SAY, FOR EXAMPLE,
THE STATE DEPARTMENT NOW IS KIND
OF ENGAGED IN TRYING TO BATTLE
THIS CONVERSATION WITH KIND OF
HASHTAGS OF THEIR OWN, TRYING
TO... IS THAT SUCCESSFUL AT ALL?
>> SO THE STATE DEPARTMENT
ACTUALLY HAS A TWIITER ACCOUNT
FOCUSED ON COUNTERING SOME OF
THESE JIHADIS AND EXTREMISTS
ONLINE, AND SPECIFICALLY
ON TWITTER.
IT’S HARD TO SAY HOW EFFECTIVE
THAT IS.
PERHAPS IT’S BETTER THAN DOING
NOTHING.
BUT WE SHOULDN’T KIND OF DELUDE
OURSELVES INTO THINKING THAT
PUBLIC DIPLOMACY CAN REALLY
CHANGE PEOPLE’S MINDS IN A VERY
OBVIOUS WAY.
THE AMERICAN GOVERNMENT DOESN’T
HAVE A LOT OF CREDIBILITY WITH
ANYONE WHO IS GOING TO BE
VAGUELY SYMPATHETIC TO THE AIMS
OF THE ISLAMIC STATE.
SO IT’S NOT JUST A PROBLEM OF
MESSAGE BUT ALSO THE MESSENGER.
>> Sreenivasan: DOES THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT JUST ANY
STREET CREDIBILITY BUT HAVE ANY
CHANCE AT TRYING TO INTERCEPT
THAT MESSAGING THAT THE ISLAMIC
STATE SEEMS TO BE PRETTY
SUCCESSFUL WITH?
>> WELL, IN TERMS OF
MONITORING RECRUITMENT, WE DO
SPEND BILLIONS OF DOLLARS A YEAR
ON THE N.S.A., WHICH I WOULD
ASSUME MONITORS QUITE A BIT OF
THIS TRAFFIC.
BUT IN TERMS OF KIND OF
COUNTERING THE PROPAGANDA, IT’S
ALWAYS GOOD TO HAVE WHAT’S
CALLED TROLLS.
I.S. PEOPLE DO HAVE THEIR OWN
TROLLS THAT WILL HARASS
AMERICAN GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS
AND OTHER ANALYSTS’ ACCOUNTS,
AND SOMETIMES IT’S GOOD FOR A
LITTLE PUSH-BACK JUST TO SHOW
THAT THE UNITED STATES IS
WATCHING AND THAT OCCASIONALLY
IT CAN ALSO POKE AT THEM.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
PHILIP SMYTH, SHADI HAMID,
THANKS SO MUCH FOR YOUR TIME.
>> THANK YOU.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING US.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO
VIEWERS LIKE YOU.
WE HEARD FROM MANY OF YOU ABOUT
LAST SATURDAY’S SIGNATURE REPORT
ON THE ACCURACY OF BACKGROUND
CHECKS.
JACK DEVINE WROTE US:
"I HAVE BEEN IN BUSINESS FOR
MYSELF FOR 25 YEARS.
ONCE YOU HIRE A PERSON, YOU
BECOME RESPONSIBLE FOR
EVERYTHING THAT INDIVIDUAL DOES
WHILE WORKING FOR YOU.
BACKGROUND CHECKS CAN SAVE YOU A
LOT OF TROUBLE AND MONEY.
TROUBLE CAUSED BY DISHONEST
PEOPLE YOU HIRE."
FRANCES HELFAND HAD THIS TO SAY:
"BACKGROUND CHECKS- AS IN
CRIMINAL BACKGROUND- ARE VERY
IMPORTANT FOR THOSE ENTRUSTED
WITH CARING FOR VULNERABLE
PEOPLE AND PERHAPS ANIMALS.
I AM STRONGLY OPPOSED TO CREDIT
CHECKS AND OTHER HIGHLY PERSONAL
INQUIRIES THAT INVADE AN
INDIVIDUAL’S RIGHT TO PRIVACY."
LEIGH GRIFFITH TOLD US:
"I HAD A D.W.I. WHEN I WAS 17.
I AM NOW 45.
I STILL NOTE IT ON MY
APPLICATION AS I AM AFRAID THEY
WOULD FIND IT IN A BACKGROUND
CHECK AND THAT WOULD DISQUALIFY
ME FOR THE POSITION.
BUT DO THEY DISQUALIFY ME
AUTOMATICALLY BECAUSE I ADMIT I
HAD A D.W.I.?
IMPOSSIBLE TO KNOW."
JACKIE RYAN OFFERED THIS:
"ME AND MY HUSBAND BOTH HAVE
CRIMINAL RECORDS.
WE ARE LAW ABIDING CITIZENS WHO
HAVE PAID THE PRICE FOR OUR
CRIMES.
HOWEVER, WE WILL NEVER BE ABLE
TO GET BETTER THAN MANUAL LABOR
JOBS DUE TO DISCRIMINATION."
BUT JOHNNY MEDINA HAD A
DIFFERENT TAKE:
"CONSIDERING THAT I HAVE BEEN
HAMPERED BY THIS FOR YEARS, I
CAN SPEAK ON IT.
YES, IT IS OKAY.
I BROUGHT THIS TROUBLE ON
MYSELF."
THEN THERE ARE CASES LIKE KEVIN
JONES, WHO, AS WE REPORTED, LOST
A JOB OFFER BECAUSE HE WAS
MISTAKEN FOR ANOTHER KEVIN
JONES.
BEVERLY MARLER SOWA WROTE:
"GOOGLE YOUR NAME AND SEE HOW
MANY PEOPLE WITH THE SAME NAME
SHOW UP.
THE CHANCES OF MIXING YOU UP
WITH SOMEONE ELSE ARE HUGE."
AS ALWAYS, LET US KNOW WHAT YOU
THINK OF OUR STORIES ON TWITTER,
FACEBOOK OR AT newshour.pbs.org.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME MORE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT.
HUNDREDS OF PEOPLE MARCHED
PEACEFULLY THROUGH THE STREETS
OF FERGUSON, MISSOURI, TO A
MAKESHIFT MEMORIAL HONORING
MICHAEL BROWN.
MICHAEL SAM, WHO WAS SET TO
BECOME THE FIRST OPENLY GAY
PLAYER IN THE NATIONAL FOOTBALL
LEAGUE, WAS RELEASED BY THE ST.
LOUIS RAMS TODAY.
AND KRAFT IS RECALLING 8,000
CASES OF AMERICAN SINGLES, WHICH
EXPIRE IN FEBRUARY OF 2015.
THE COMPANY SAYS THEY WERE
STORED IMPROPERLY AND COULD MAKE
PEOPLE SICK.
MORE DETAILS ON OUR WEB SITE,
newshour.pbs.org.
I’M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.